Swahili 
Making the World and Man (1) 
Before the beginning of time there was God. He was never born nor will He ever die. If He wishes a thing, He merely says to it: "Be!" and it exists.
So God said: "There be light!" And there was light. God took a fistful of this light and it shone in His hand. Then He said: "I am pleased with you, my light, I will make out of you my prophet, I will mould you into the soul of Mohammed."
When he had created the soul of the prophet Mohammed (May God pray for him and give him peace), He loved it so much that He decided to create mankind so that He might send Mohammed to it as His messenger to bring His word to Earth. His word would teach the peoples of the earth the distinction between Good and Evil, and in the end God would judge all the souls and reward those who had chosen to follow the Good Messenger, and reject the others.
With his infinite knowledge God foresaw all the events that would happen in the centuries to follow until the last day. With His unlimited power God began to create all the things He would need for some purpose which He alone knew.
First He created the Throne and the Carpet for Himself to sit on at the Last Judgement. The Throne has four legs supported by four strong beasts. The Carpet that covers it has all the lovely colours of the rainbow and stretches out along the skies as far as the borders of space. Under the Throne there is the most delightful place in the Universe: the souls who are allowed to dwell in the shadow of the Carpet will rejoice for ever. The brilliant light of the Divine Presence is softly filtered by the many-coloured veils of which the Carpet is composed.
The third thing God created was the Well-preserved Tablet. It is a board so large that it can contain a complete and detailed description of all the events that ever take place anywhere in past and future. The Tablet has a soul of her own and is one of God's most faithful servants. She carries all His wisdom and all His commandments for ever and ever. She is called the Mother of Books, because all the Sacred Books of Mankind in which God has revealed some of His Truth contain only fragments of her contents. The secrets of the Universe, insofar as they were ever represented by symbols, are inscribed on her surface, in characters which only He can read.
With the Tablet He created the Pen to write His commandments. The Pen is as long as the distance between Heaven and Earth. It has a thinking head and a personality, and as soon as it had come into existence, God ordered it: "Write!" The Pen asked: "What shall I write, my Lord?" God said: "Destiny." Since that moment the Pen has been busy writing on the Tablet all the deeds of men.
Of course, if it pleases God to change His mind, He does so. If He projects a different future than was foreseen in previous plans, the writing will disappear from the Tablet and the Pen will record new facts.
The fifth thing God created was the Trumpet, and with it the archangel Serafili [Asrafel]. The angel holds the Trumpet to his mouth, waiting patiently in the same position, century after century, until it pleases God to terminate history. Then He will give the signal, and Serafili will blow his first blast. The Trumpet has such a powerful voice that at its first sound the mountains will collapse, the stars will come plummeting down and Doomsday will begin.
The sixth thing which God created was the Garden of Delights which was destined for the good souls. There they would sojourn for ever and ever, forgetting the sufferings of their lives on earth. In it there are streams of limpid water, rivers of milk and honey, fragrant flowers and trees whose branches bend down heavy with fruits. The fruits are soft and sweet and juicy and as soon as one falls off, a new one grows on the same branch in no time. Who would not give everything he possessed to be there? Who would not endure a short span of life on earth to dwell in that garden for all eternity?
The seventh thing which God created, foreseeing in His wisdom that many souls would not follow the good Messenger, was the Fire. Crackling, it sprang up from the deepest bottom of shadows, in the remotest pit of space. Evil smell and smoke is its essence, roaring thunder its voice. "My Lord," cried the Fire, "where are the souls of sinners, I want to see them suffer!" Who would not pray night and day that his soul may avoid this eternal torture.
God went on and on creating, taking things out of not-being, for God requires no rest; neither sleep nor slumber seize Him.
God now created the angels, a myriad voices who proclaim His praise. Out of pure light He created them; their minds are lucid as the light itself, their hearts are pure as morning air. The thought of sin never occurs to them, they never hatch evil plans in their bosoms. They are as honest as the light that is their element and always shines through their bodies. This is why they are devoted servants of their Lord, and the idea of disobedience cannot arise in their hearts. Their wings are shining white and soft; they tremble with the fear of God.
The first of the archangels is Jiburili [Gabriel] whose task it is to carry God's Word to His prophets. Therefore Jiburili is also called the Trustworthy Spirit.
The tradition says that Mohammed, during his life on earth, asked Jiburili: "Show me your true shape." Jiburili warned him that this would be dangerous, but Mohammed insisted. Then Jiburili showed himself, and lo! he filled the whole horizon, and his many wings rustled through the skies from east to west. The prophet fainted with fear, and fell. Jiburili lifted him up and said: "Do not fear, I am your brother Jiburili."
When God had doomed the cities of Lot, He sent Jiburili to destroy them. To this end, Jiburili unfolded two special black wings that spell perdition whenever they appear. With these wings he tore the two cities out of the earth like poisonous toadstools, raised them so high that the inhabitants of heaven could hear their cocks crowing, and then flung them down into the Fire.
Mikaili [Michael] is the second archangel. He is in charge of the sustenance of all the creatures of the earth. Thousands of angels serve under his command and are busy day and night. They provide all living beings with all the things they need, according to God's decree. Some will receive plenty, others may starve, and He alone knows the reason. No mortal being need fear that he will not receive his due. What God has destined for him will come to him: air to breathe, water to drink, food to eat, partners to procreate with. We do not have to look for these things; they will be brought to us. We are all like beggars sitting at the Lord's door, and praying that He may throw us a few coins daily.
Serafili [Asrafel], the angel of the Trumpet, has already been mentioned. His task is simply to wait for the signal of the end.
Zeraili [Azrael] is the angel of death, the taker of souls, who brings each creature the last message. He obeys God alone, he commands kings and caliphs, jinns and giants, and they all follow him humbly into the unknown.
Maliki is the guardian of the Fire in which the sinful souls, the hypocrites and heathens, are punished. His face is terrible to see; he is created out of the glowing clouds of God's wrath.
Ridhuani is the custodian of Paradise. He opens its seven gates whenever God thus orders him, so that a thousand pleasant smells are spread out over the earth.
Many other angels live in heaven, more than we can know. There is an angel with a thousand heads: each head has a thousand mouths and every mouth proclaims God's glory in a different language.
There is an angel whose left half is fire, and his right half snow; the snow does not extinguish the fire, nor the fire melt the snow, because God wills it so. At His order two opposing elements can exist side by side; and He can make enemies meet.
There is also a cock in heaven: its feet are on the lowest level of Paradise but its head is above the seventh level. Its function is to crow at the precise moment God has destined for the salat-asububi, the prayer of dawn. Every morning before sunrise it crows jubilantly, flapping its wings, and all the angels of heaven immediately assemble for the morning prayer. Its joyful Kuku-likuu can be heard on earth by all the cocks, on the farms as well as in the bush, and they all repeat it, encouraging each other. This is a sign for men to rise from their couches and prepare themselves for the first prayer of the day. 
