Bulu 
How Zambe Created Man, the Chimpanzee, and the Gorilla 
Some people have believed that Zambe, the son of Mebe'e, created the man Zambe, the chimpanzee Zambe, the gorilla Zambe, and the elephant Zambe. One man was black, the other one white. He gave unto them, moreover, fire and cutlasses and hoes and axes and water. After this they stirred up the fire; and when the white man came and sat by the fire, when he looked into the fire, the smoke came into his eyes, so that the tears came. Therefore he arose and went away from the fire. The only thing which the white man treasured was the book which he held in his hand.
The chimpanzee saw a cluster of mvut-fruit ripening on a tree standing in the unplanted border of a clearing; so he threw away all he had, and went and ate the fruit of the mvut-tree. He and the gorilla Zambe did in this manner.
The black man stirred up the fire around the standing stump of an adum tree, but he neglected the book.
The elephant also had enough things, but he did not remember one of them.
When Zambe, the son of Mebe'e, came, he called them together: and asked them, "All the things which I left in your possession, where are they?" The Chimpanzee made answer, and said, "My things I left where I ate the fruit of the mvut-tree." So he said to him, "Go and fetch them!" When, however, the chimpanzee came to the place where he had left them, he found not a single one of them there. Therefore Zambe, the son of Mebe'e, became angry with him, and said to him, "You are a fool." And he dipped his hands into a pool of water, and sprinkled hair all over the body of the chimpanzee; he gave him also large teeth in his mouth, and said to him, moreover, "You will always live in the forests." The same he said to the gorilla: "You and the chimpanzee will be alike."
After this he also asked the black man, "Where is your book?" and he replied, "I threw it away." Zambe therefore said to him, "You will be left without knowledge, because you threw away the book." Moreover, Zambe, the son of Mebe'e, said to him, "You will go to a man and ask of him a wife in return for goods, you will also work for him." He also said again to the black man, "You will be always tending the fire, for it is the one thing you especially looked after." Thereupon said Zambe to the white man. "In all the days to come you will never put away the book, because you did look after the book which I gave you; therefore you will be a man of understanding, because you cared for a real thing." He said to him also, "You will always live without fire, for you cared but little for the fire."
Thus it is that the chimpanzees and gorillas and elephants went to the forest to live; and they always cry and howl, because Zambe, the son of Mebe'e, gave them a curse because they did not keep the things he had given them to keep.
Therefore we now perceive that the white men are men of understanding, but the black people are ignorant; moreover, also the black men go and serve them; the black people also warm themselves at the fire.
