Ancient Egypt
Theology from Memphis
Live the Horus: Who Prospers the Two Lands; the Two Goddesses: Who Prospers the Two Lands; the Horus of Gold: Who Prospers the Two Lands; the King of Upper and Lower Egypt: Nefer-ka-Re, the Son of Re: Sha-[ba-ka], beloved of Ptah-South-of-His-Wall, living like Re forever. His majesty copied this text anew in the House of his father Ptah-South-of-His-Wall. Now his majesty had found it as something which the ancestors had made but which was worm-eaten. It was unknown from beginning to end. Then [his majesty] copied [it] anew, so that it is better than its state formerly, in order that his name might endure and his memorial be made to last in the House of his father Ptah-South-of-His-Wall in the course of eternity, through that which the Son of Re: [Sha-ba-ka] did for his father Ptah-tenen, so that he might be given life forever.
The Ennead gathered themselves to him, and he judged Horus and Seth. He prevented them from quarreling further, and he made Seth the King of Upper Egypt in the land of Upper Egypt, at the place where he was born, Su. Then Geb made Horus the King of Lower Egypt in the land of Lower Egypt,at the place where his father [i.e., Osiris] was drowned, Pezshet-Tawi. Thus Horus stood in one place, and Seth stood in another place, and they were reconciled about the Two Lands.
Words spoken by Geb to Seth: “Go to the place in which thou wert born.” Seth—Upper Egypt. Words spoken by Geb to Horus: “Go to the place in which thy father was drowned.” Horus—Lower Egypt. Words spoken by Geb to Horus and Seth: “I have judged you.” Lower and Upper Egypt.
But then it became ill in the heart of Geb that the portion of Horus was only equal to the portion of Seth. So Geb gave his entire inheritance to Horus, that is, the son of his son, his first-born. .. . Thus Horus stood over the entire land. Thus this land was united, proclaimed with the great name: “Ta-tenen [another name for Ptah] South-of-His-Wall, the Lord of Eternity.” The 
two Great Sorceresses grew upon his head. So it was that Horus appeared as ; King of Upper and Lower Egypt, who united the Two Lands in Wall Nome, in the place in which the Two Lands are united.
It happened that reed and papyrus were set at the great double door of the House of Ptah. That means Horus and Seth, who were reconciled and united, so that they associated and their quarreling ceased in the place which they reached, being joined in the House of Ptah’ “the Balance of the Two Lands,” in which Upper and Lower Egypt have been weighed.
The gods who came into being as Ptah: Ptah who is upon the Great Throne; Ptah-Nun, the father who [begot] Atum; Ptah-Naunet, the mother who bore Atum; Ptah the Great, that is, the heart and tongue of the Ennead; [Ptah] ... who gave birth to the gods; 
There came into being as the heart and there came into being as the tongue something in the form of Atum. The mighty Great One is Ptah, who transmitted [life to all gods], as well as to their ka’s, through this heart, by which Horus became Ptah, and through this tongue, by which Thoth became Ptah.
Thus it happened that the heart and tongue gained control over [every] other member of the body, by teaching that he (i.e., Ptah) is in every body and in every mouth of all gods, all men, [all] cattle, all creeping things, and everything that lives, by thinking and commanding everything that he wishes.
His Ennead is before him in the form of teeth and lips. That is the equivalent of the semen and hands of Atum. Whereas the Ennead of Atum  came into being by his semen and his fingers, the Ennead of Ptah, however, is the teeth and lips in this mouth, which pronounced the name of everything, from which Shu and Tefnut came forth, and which was the fashioner of the Ennead. 
The sight of the eyes, the hearing of the ears, and the smelling the air by the nose, they report to the heart. It is this which causes every completed concept to come forth, and it is the tongue which announces what the heart thinks.
Thus all the gods were formed and his Ennead was completed. Indeed, all the divine order really came into being through what the heart thought and the tongue commanded. Thus the ka-spirits were made and the hemsut-spirits were appointed, they who make all provisions and all nourishment, by this speech. Thus justice was given to him who does what is liked, and injustice to him who does what is disliked. Thus life was given to him who has peace and death was given to him who has sin. Thus were made all work and all crafts, the action of the arms, the movement of the legs, and the activity of every member, in conformance with this command which the heart thought, which came forth through the tongue, and which gives value to everything.
Thus it happened that it was said of Ptah: “He who made all and brought the gods into being.” He is indeed Ta-tenen, who brought forth the gods, for everything came forth from him, nourishment and provisions, the offerings of the gods, and every good thing. Thus it was discovered and understood that his strength is greater than that of the other gods. And so Ptah was satisfied, after he had made everything, as well as all the divine order. He had formed the gods, he had made cities, he had founded nomes, he had put the gods in their shrines,he had established their offerings, he had founded their shrines, he had made their bodies like that with which their hearts were satisfied. So the gods entered into their bodies of every kind of wood, of every kind of stone, of every kind of clay, or anything which might grow upon him, in which they had taken form. So all the gods, as well as their ka’s gathered themselves to him, content and associated with the Lord of the Two Lands.
The Great Seat, which rejoices the heart of the gods, which is in the House of Ptah, the mistress of all life, is the Granary of the God, through which the sustenance of the Two Lands is prepared, because of the fact that Osiris drowned in his water, while Isis and Nephthys watched. They saw him and they were distressed at him. Horus commanded Isis and Nephthys repeatedly that they lay hold on Osiris and prevent his drowning. They turned their heads in time. So they brought him to land. He entered the mysterious portals in the glory of the lords of eternity, in the steps of him who shines forth on the horizon, on the ways of Re in the Great Seat. He joined with the court and associated with the gods of Ta-tenen Ptah, the lord of years.
Thus Osiris came to be in the land in the “House of the Sovereign’’ on the north side of this land, which he had reached. His son Horus appeared as King of Upper Egypt and appeared as King of Lower Egypt, in the embrace of his father Osiris, together with the gods who were in front of him and who were behind him.
