Assyria
Another Version of the Creation
When both heaven and earth had been completely finished, (And) the mother of the goddesses had been brought into being; When the earth had been brought forth (and) the earth had been shaped; When the destinies of heaven and earth had been fixed; (When) trench and canal had been given their right course; (And) the banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates had been established, (Then) Anu, Enlil, Shamash, (and) Ea, The great gods, Seated themselves (with) the Anunnaki, the great gods, In the exalted sanctuary And recounted among themselves what had been created.
“Now that the destinies of heaven and earth have been fixed; Trench and canal have been given their right course; The banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates Have been established; What (else) shall we do? What (else) shall we create? O Anunnaki, ye great gods, What (else) shall we do? What (else) shall we create?”
The great gods who were present, The Anunnaki, who fix the destinies, Both (groups) of them, made answer to Enlil: “In Uzumua, the bond of heaven and earth, Let us slay the Lamga gods. With their blood let us create mankind; The service of the gods be their portion, For all times To establish the boundary ditch, To place the spade and the basket Into their hands For the dwelling of the great gods,Which is fit to be an exalted sanctuary, To mark off field from field; For all times To establish the boundary ditch, To give the trench (its) right course, To establish the boundary, To water the four regions of the. earth, To raise the plants, ESTABLISH the boundary, To fill(?) the granary, To make the field of the Anunnaki produce, To increase the abundance in the land, To celebrate the festival of the gods, To pour out cold water For the great house of the gods, which is fit to be an exalted sanctuary, Ulligarra (and) Zalgarra They called their names. (That Ulligarra and Zalgarra should) increase ox, sheep, cattle, fish, and fowl, The abundance in the land, Enul (and) Ereshul Decreed with their holy mouths.
Aruru, the lady of the gods, who is fit for rulership, Ordained for them mighty destinies: Skilled worker to produce for skilled worker (and) unskilled worker for unskilled worker, Springing up among them like grain from the ground, A thing which, (like) the star(s) of heaven, shall not be changed forever.
Day and night To celebrate the festival of the gods, (These) mighty destinies, Among themselves Did Anu, Enlil, Ea, and Ninmah, The great gods, decree (for them).
In the place where mankind was created, There Nisaba was firmly established. Let the wise teach the mystery to the wise.
