Zoroastrian
Speaking Of the World 
First I will speak of the world and discuss whether it has (always) existed or whether it was created. If it should be said that it has (always) existed, this opinion is untenable: for ever anew do things wax in the world and then again wane [and wax], decrease and then again increase. Further all that is susceptible of coming to be and passing away and is the effect of a cause is not proper to God. Thus it is established that the world has not (always) existed and that it has been created. Moreover, a created thing necessarily implies a Creator. Now it must be known that in the Pahtavi religion to which the Zoroastrians adhere, the world is said to have been created. After saying that the world has been created we must further say who created it and when, how, and why he created it.
In the religion of Zoroaster it is thus revealed. Except Time all other things are created. Time is the creator; and Time has no limit, neither top nor bottom. It has always been and shall be for evermore. No sensible person will say whence Time has come. In spite of all the grandeur that surrounded it, there was no one to call it creator; for it had not brought forth creation. Then it created fire and water; and when it had brought them together, Ohrmazd came into existence, and simultaneously Time became Creator and Lord with regard to the creation it had brought forth. Ohrmazd was bright, pure, sweet-smelling, and beneficent, and had power over all good things. Then, he looked down, he saw Ahriman ninety-six thousand parasangs away, black, foul, stinking, and maleficent; and it appeared fearful to Ohrmazd, for he was a frightful enemy. And when Ohrmazd saw this enemy, he thought thus: "I must utterly destroy this enemy," and he considered with what and how many instruments he could destroy him. 
Then did Ohrmazd begin the work of creation. Whatever Ohrmazd did, he did with the aid of Time; for all the excellence that Ohrmazd needed, had (already) been created. And Ohrmazd made Time of the Long Dominion manifest which has the measure of twelve thousand years, and within it he attached the firmament, the artificer (and heaven). And each of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac which are bound to the firmament he appointed for a thousand years.
During three thousand years the spiritual creation was made; and Aries, Taurus, and Gemini held sway each for a thousand years. Then Ahriman (with the aid of Time) turned toward the heights that he might do battle with Ohrmazd: he saw an army marshalled and drawn up in ranks, and rushed back to hell. From the foulness, darkness, and stench that was wihin him, he raised an army. This was possible for him. In this matter much has been said. The meaning of this is that when he (saw he) was empty-handed, he rushed back to hell. Because of the righteousness he saw in Ohrmazd for three thousand years he could not move, so that during these thousand years material creation was made. The control of the world passed to Cancer, Leo, and Virgo. In this matter much has been said.
I will say a few words on this subject. In the creation of the material world first he manifested the sky, and the measure of it was twenty-four (thousand) by twenty-four thousand parasangs, and its top reached Garooman. After forty-five days he caused the water to appear (from the sky): after sixty days the earth appeared out of the water: after seventy-five days he manifested plants, large and small: after thirty days the Bull and Gayomart appeared: and after eighty days Adam and Eve made their appearance. When the three thousand years we have mentioned (had elapsed) and Man, the material world, and the other creatures we have mentioned had come into existence, the accursed Ahriman again bestirred himself: and (Time brought it about that Ahbriman) bored a hole in the sky, the mountains, and the earth, rushed into the material world and defiled everything in it with his wickedness and impurity. As he possessed no spiritual thing, he did battle for ninety days and nights in the material world; and the firmament was rent, and the spiritual beings came to the assistance of the material world. And they seized the seven most evil demons and brought them to the firmament and bound them with unseen (spiritual, minu) bonds. And Ahriman afflicted Gayomart with a thousand torments till he passed away. And from him certain things came into existence. About this much has been said. From the Bull too certain things and animals came into existence. About this much has been said.
Then they seized upon Ahriman and carried him off to hell by that very hole through which he had entered the world; and they bound him with unseen bonds. Two angels, even Ardibihist, the Amahraspand, and Varhram, the god, stood in guard over him.
